---
layout: post
title: Open UI Automation
tags: [ouia, testing, ui]
---
I guess all of you who have worked on UI testing know the "locator" problem. In order to find an
element in the DOM you need to provide a locator and usually it's an XPath string. Sometimes that
xpath can be quite nontrivial and in one day developers change the code and your locator cannot
find the required element. In order to avoid such situations as much as possible my colleagues
Peter Savage, Ronny Pfannschmidt and Karel Hala have developed a specification for frontend
developers Open Web UI Design Specification for Enabling Automation (OUIA). If your application
complies with OUIA it will have predictable locators and the behavior. This significantly simplifies
writing automated tests.

## The specification

You can familiarize the specification here <https://ouia.readthedocs.io/>. Below I will describe a
part that relates to components and component frameworks.

## OUIA components

The smallest building block of a front-end application is a component. It can be a button, dropdown
or even just a text block. If we want to interact with it we should find the root of the element in
the DOM. As I wrote above an xpath string is the most versatile way to locate it. Consider the
following example:

```xpath
.//div[@class="pf-c-button"]
```

### data-component-id

This xpath finds all elements with `div` tag that has "pf-c-button" in `class` attribute. If you
need a specific element you can specify an index:

```xpath
.//div[@class="pf-c-buton"][1]
```

Such queries have several problems. First, there are might be situations when elements on the page
are shuffled on every reload and in the next test session your automation will fail. Another issue
with indexed xpath queries that they don't tell us anything about the underneath object's id. The
most common example would be a table. Usually tables represent data from databases. In your
automation test suite you often manipulate objects that abstract your testing application objects.
Thus we as testers would like to see some unique id in the root HTML tag. We could use `id`
attribute but in some cases it can be reserved for other purposes. It's better to use our own
attrbiute which we can control. `data-ouia-component-id` is such attribute. If it's one of many
buttons we could assign a variant of the button:

```html
<button data-ouia-component-id="Submit"></button>
```

If it's a row in a table that represents data from some database we might want to have the id of the
row matches to the id from the database, e.g. uuid:

```html
<tr data-ouia-component-id="28b9fe89-da52-4dcf-aafe-9f675d708d09">
  <td>...</td>
</tr>
```

### data-component-type

Such components as dropdowns, navigations, paginators and others have complex behavior and their
root elements in the most cases don't tell us what exact component we work with. Of course we can
assume the component type from class attribute or other indicators but it always requires adding
some logic in a test suite. OUIA introduces `data-component-type` attribute. Let's consider
Patternfly's [Dropdown](http://patternfly-react.surge.sh/components/dropdown#basic) component:

```html
<div class="pf-c-dropdown pf-m-expanded" data-ouia-component-type="PF4/Dropdown"
    data-ouia-component-id="some_id"><button data-ouia-component-type="PF4/DropdownToggle"
        data-ouia-component-id="some_id" class="pf-c-dropdown__toggle" type="button"
        aria-expanded="true" aria-haspopup="true"><span class="pf-c-dropdown__toggle-text">Dropdown</span></button>
    <ul aria-labelledby="toggle-id" class="pf-c-dropdown__menu" role="menu">
        <li role="menuitem"><a tabindex="-1" data-ouia-component-type="PF4/DropdownItem" data-ouia-safe="true"
                data-ouia-component-id="some_id" aria-disabled="false"
                class="pf-c-dropdown__menu-item">Link</a></li>
    </ul>
</div>
```

As you can see it has `div` as a root element and in order to recongize that it's a Dropdown we
could get value of class attribute which is `pf-c-dropdown pf-m-expanded` and extract the name of
the component from it.
`data-ouia-component-type` explicitely tells us that we deal with Dropdown. `PF4` part specifies
a namespace or name of component library. In case of Patternfly it's `PF4`. It might be possible
that a page can have the same components from different libraries therefore it would be good to
separate them.

### data-ouia-safe

In [Selenium please wait!]({% post_url 2020-06-18-selenium-please-wait %}) I described a problem
with animated elements. We should wait when the animation is finished and only after that we can
continue to interact with the element. `data-ouia-safe` must be `true` only when a component doesn't
play any animation. It seems it's the most tricky part because it requires some additional
javascript code that will set the value for that attribute.

### OUIA xpath

Combining all these pieces together we can have a very minimal versatile xpath for a given
component with some id. Here is it:

```xpath
.//*[@data-ouia-component-type="Some Component" and @data-ouia-component-id="some id"]
```

We can use this xpath in a test suites and frameworks. Moreover OUIA opens vast possibilities for
code generation. We can create a sort of DOM scanner that will generate ready-to-use abstractions
for testing frameworks.

## OUIA in the wild

The first component library that started add OUIA attributes is **Patternfly**. We closely work
together with Patternlfy developers to provide better experience with OUIA to library consumers and
testers. Many thanks to [@zallen](https://github.com/redallen) and
[@jschuller](https://github.com/jschuler). Besides there is ongoing work to adding OUIA
compatibility layer in various test suites and frameworks such as **widgetastic.core** and
**widgetastic.patternfly4**. I hope the specification will go beyond of Red Hat's projects and other
people will see the benefits of using OUIA.

## References

* <https://ouia.readthedocs.io/>
* <https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-react/>
* <https://github.com/RedHatQE/widgetastic.core/pull/177>
